When You Can’t Climb Trees Any More
He stood on the grass verge by the side of the road and looked over the garden wall at the old house.
It hadn’t changed much. There’s little anyone can do to alter a house built with solid blocks of granite
brought from the river-bed. But there was a new outhouse, and there were fewer trees. He was
pleased to see that the jack-fruit tree still stood at the side of the building, casting its shade on the
wall. He remembered his grandmother saying: ‘A blessing rests on the house where falls the shadow
of a tree.’ And so the present owners must also be the recipients of the tree’s blessings.
At the spot where he stood there had once been a turnstile, and as a boy he would swing on it,
going round and round until he was quite dizzy. Now the turnstile had gone, the opening walled up.
Tall hollyhocks grew on the other side of the wall.
‘What are you looking at?’
It was a disembodied voice at first. Moments later a girl stood framed between dark red
hollyhocks, staring at the man.
It was difficult to guess her age; she might have been twelve or she might have been sixteen: slim
and dark, with lovely eyes and long black hair.
‘I’m looking at the house,’ he said.
‘Why? Do you want to buy it?’
‘Is it your house?’
‘It’s my father’s.’
‘And what does your father do?’
‘He’s only a colonel.’
‘Only a colonel?’
‘Well, he should have been a Brigadier by now.’
The man burst out laughing.
‘It’s not funny,’she said. ‘Even mummy says he should have been a Brigadier.’
It was on the tip of his tongue to make a witty remark (‘Perhaps that’s why he’s still a colonel’), but
he did not want to give offence. They stood on either side of the wall, appraising each other.
‘Well,’she said finally. ‘If you don’t want to buy the house, what are you looking at?’
‘I used to live here once.’
‘Oh.’
‘Twenty-five years ago. When I was a boy. And then again, when I was a young man … until my
grandmother died, and then we sold the house and went away.’
She was silent for a while, taking in this information. Then she said. ‘And you’d like to buy it back
now, but you don’t have the money?’ He did not look very prosperous.
‘No, I wasn’t thinking of buying it back. I wanted to see it again, that’s all. How long have you
lived here?’
‘Only three years.’ She smiled. She’d been eating a melon, and there was still juice at the corners
of her mouth. ‘Would you like to come in — and look — once more?’
‘Wouldn’t your parents mind?’
‘They’ve gone to the Club. They won’t mind. I’m allowed to bring my friends home.’
‘Even adult friends?’
‘How old are you?’
‘Oh, just middle-aged, but feeling young today.’ And to prove it he decided he’d climb over the
wall instead of going round by the gate. He got up on the wall all right, but had to rest there, breathing
heavily. ‘Middle-aged man on the flying trapeze,’ he muttered to himself.
‘Let me help you,’she said, and gave him her hand.
He slithered down into a flower-bed, shattering the stem of a hollyhock.
As they walked across the grass he noticed a stone bench under a mango tree. It was the bench on
which his grandmother used to sit, when she tired of pruning rose bushes and bougainvillaea.
‘Let’s sit here,’ he said. ‘I don’t want to go inside.’
She sat beside him on the bench. It was March, and the mango tree was in bloom. A sweet, heavy
fragrance drenched the garden
They were silent for some time. The man closed his eyes and remembered other times — the music
of a piano, the chiming of a grandfather clock, the constant twitter of budgerigars on the verandah, his
grandfather cranking up the old car …
‘I used to climb the jackfruit tree,’ he said, opening his eyes. ‘I didn’t like the jackfruit, though. Do
you?’
‘It’s all right in pickles.’
‘I suppose so … The tree was easy to climb, I spent a lot of time in it.’
‘Do you want to climb it again? My parents won’t mind.’
‘No, I don’t think so. Not after climbing the wall! Let’s just sit here for a few minutes and talk. I
mention the jackfruit tree because it was my favourite place. Do you see that thick branch stretching
out over the roof? Half-way along it there’s a small hollow in which I used to keep some of my
treasures.’
‘What kind of treasures?’
‘Oh, nothing very valuable. Marbles I’d won. A book I wasn’t supposed to read. A few old coins
I’d collected. Things came and went. There was my Grandfather’s medal, well not his exactly,
because he was British and the Iron Cross was a German decoration, awarded for bravery during the
War — that’s the first World War — when Grandfather fought in France. He got it from a German
soldier.’
‘Dead or alive?’
‘Pardon?’ Oh, you mean the German. I never asked. Dead, I suppose. Or perhaps he was a prisoner.
I never asked Grandfather. Isn’t that strange?’
‘And the Iron Cross? Do you still have it?’
‘No,’ he said, looking her in the eye. ‘I left it in the jackfruit tree.
‘You left it in the tree!’
‘Yes, I was so busy at the time — packing, and saying goodbye to friends, and thinking about the
ship I was going to sail on — that I just forgot all about it.’
She was silent, considering, her finger on her lips, her gaze fixed on the jackfruit tree.
Then, quietly, she said, ‘It may still be there. In the hollow of the branch.’
‘Yes,’ he said. ‘After twenty-five years, it may still be there. Unless someone else found it.’
‘Would you like to take a look?’
‘I can’t climb trees any more.
‘I can! I’ll go and see. You just sit here and wait for me.’
She sprang up and ran across the grass, swift and sweet of limb. Soon she was in the jackfruit tree,
crawling along the projecting branch. A warm wind brought little eddies of dust along the road.
Summer was in the air. Ah, if only he could learn to climb trees again!
‘I’ve found something!’she cried.
And now, barefoot, she runs breathlessly towards him, in her outstretched hand a rusty old medal.
He takes it from her and turns it over on his palm.
‘Is it the Iron Cross?’she asks eagerly.
‘Yes, this is it.’
‘Now I know why you came. You wanted to see if it was still in the tree.’
‘I don’t know. I’m not really sure why I came. But you can keep the Cross. You found it, after all.’
‘No, you keep it. It’s yours.’
‘But it might have remained in the tree for a hundred years if you hadn’t gone to look for it.’
‘Only because you came back —’
‘On the right day, at the right time, and with the right person.’ Getting up, he squeezed the hard rusty
medal into her soft palm. ‘No, it wasn’t the Cross I came for. It was my lost youth.’
She understood this, even though her own youth still lay ahead of her, she understood it, not as an
adult, but with the wisdom of the child that was still part of her. She walked with him to the gate and
stood there gazing after him as he walked away. Where the road turned, he glanced back and waved to
her. Then he quickened his step and moved briskly towards the bus stop. There was a spring in his
step. Something cried aloud in his heart